---
layout: archive
title: "Research"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---

I am interested in the individual differences that contribute to mental simulation deficits in post-traumatic stress disorder, a cognitive deficit that both predisposes and leads to disorder maintenance in adults. To explore this, I use eye tracking and neuroimaging to examine the gaze and neural correlates of these deficits, along with mixed-method approaches to analyse participants' narratives. By studying these processes in both adulthood and adolescence - a period associated by a higher likelihood of experiencing trauma - this research aims to deepen our understanding of the factors that drive PTSD development and persistence across the lifespan, to ultimately inform the development and mechanistic understanding of different interventions.

**Visual exploration during mental simulation through eye movements**\
Despite the bidirectional relationship between eye movements and memory processing, little research has measured gaze behavior during mental simulation tasks in individuals with PTSD. In my recent work (Marlatte et al., in prep), I found that individuals with PTSD exhibit lower baseline fixation rates when imagining novel neutral scenes - even without the presence of cognitive deficits. This finding provides insight into changes in hippocampal-related visual exploration, extending beyond the memory and spatial processing deficits typically seen in this population; however, it remains unclear whether these fixation rate differences also extend to past or future thinking which is an aim of future work. Additionally, a key treatment for PTSD — Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing Therapy — critically involves altering gaze behavior, though its underlying mechanism is still unknown. Understanding baseline gaze behavior and how gaze manipulations may differentially affect mental simulation in those with PTSD will help clarify the mechanism of this treatment, leading to its more effective implementation.

**Past and future thinking in adolescence**\
Few studies have examined mental simulation in adolescence, and those that have primarily focus on autobiographical memory in response to valenced cues. It remains unclear whether the mental simulation deficits seen in adults are also present in adolescence, or if they are linked to hippocampal and prefrontal disturbances. To explore this, I have conducted an initial behavioral study on imagining neutral, novel scenarios in adolescence (Marlatte et al., submitted), which found unique deficits as compared to in adults (Marlatte et al. 2022). Understanding developmental PTSD-related cognitive changes can inform age-appropriate interventions to mitigate the long-term effects of trauma, particularly when autobiographical recall or future thinking is challenging. Additionally, it's unknown whether neurocognitive changes due to developmental trauma contribute to the deficits commonly reported in adulthood. Examining neurocognitive changes from adolescence into early adulthood longitudinally is a goal for future work to better understand the predisposing factors for disorder development during this critical period.

**Neural dynamics during mental simulation**\
A hallmark symptom of PTSD is experiencing sensory-rich, in-the-moment intrusive recollections, which are often fragmented (e.g., flashbacks), and this fragmentation extends to the mental simulation of everyday events. I have found that disturbances in the generation of details in mental simulations (e.g., the number of details, their vividness) and their spatial coherence (e.g., the degree of fragmentation) may be separable yet interdependent aspects of mental simulation, supported by unique structural neural (Marlatte et al., 2022) and gaze correlates (Marlatte et al., in prep).  However, it remains unclear how functional interactions between the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex, and sensory cortices are disrupted during mental simulation in those with PTSD to support this phenomenon. My current and future work aims to understand the functional neural and gaze correlates of these two subprocesses, which can enhance theories of hippocampal function and neurocognitive models of PTSD.

**Mixed method approaches to narrative analysis**\
Interventions should be grounded in the experiences of those who will be ultimately using them. To provide a comprehensive understanding of participants' internal experience for this ultimate aim, I employ behavioural coding (e.g., autobiographical interview), computational word analysis softwares (e.g., LIWC-22 and qualitative techniques (e.g., thematic analysis) - at times, simultaneously.
